Welcome back everyone to this lecture on your portfolio and statistics.
So far we've really only analyzed individual stocks.
Now we're going to shift our attention to a more realistic understanding of a portfolio of multiple
stocks.
Usually when you're doing algorithmic trading you're not just dealing with a single stock you're doing
a portfolio.
So the question comes up what is a portfolio analytically and mathematically speaking to put it simply
a portfolio is just a set of allocations in a variety of securities.
So for example you could have 20 percent of your total money portfolio in Apple stock 30 percent in
Facebook and then 50 percent in alphabet or Google.
These percentages should add up to 100 percent or defined as weights.
They should add up to one that is usually more we're dealing with portfolios will define things as 0.5
of your portfolio standing for 50 percent.
So let's review a few key statistics for a portfolio.
Some of the few keys to that we've already talked about are things like daily returns.
That is the percent return from one day to the next for each stock.
Then we also have cumulative return.
That is the amount return after an entire time period.
Then we have the average day the return which is just the mean of the daily returns and we also talked
about the standard deviation of a daily return which is just a standard deviation of the daily returns
and we can think about that as the volatility of that actual return.
But there's still one critical statistic we haven't actually discussed yet.
And it's the Sharpe ratio named after William Sharp.
Before we explain what it is let's give you an intuitive understanding of why it is necessary.
Let's imagine that we have three portfolio comparison's So for each of these cases let's try to understand
intuitively which portfolio is better.
We have an orange portfolio and a purple portfolio.
If we look at case 1 the x axis just represents the time period and the y axis just represents the total
price of the portfolio.
After some sort of time period has passed with the percentage implicating how much you actually got
in return.
If you look at case 1 we can see that that orange top line it returns 8 percent and that bottom purple
line return the 5 percent.
So if you ask someone which portfolio is better in case one the orange or the purple you would probably
just intuitively say the purple it had a greater return.
If we look at Case number two in the middle both portfolios return the same amount both return to 5
percent.
So if someone asked you which one would you rather have.
Intuitively you would probably think you would want the purple line and that's because the purple line
is a lot more stable.
It has a lot less volatility.
The orange line goes all over the place it has a lot more volatility.
It has a lot more fluctuation meaning it has a higher risk.
And if they both return the same amount then you'll probably just choose the less volatile stock.
Then we get to something like Case 3 where we can say we have a more stable stock in purple with a 6
percent return.
And we have a more volatile stock with a 12 percent return.
And now the question arises Well which one should we choose should you have a larger appetite for risk
and take the 12 percent or should you have a lower volatility and take the 6 percent what the Sharpe
ratio allows us to do.
It allows us to use mathematics in order to quantify the relationship between the mean daily return
and then the volatility or the standard deviation of daily returns.
So let's go ahead and discuss what the Sharpe ratio is actually in a formula accent's the Sharpe ratio
is a measure for calculating risk adjusted return and this ratio has become the industry standard for
such calculations.
And it was developed by Nobel Laureate William F. Sharpe The formula for the Sharpe ratio is the following.
You have s is equal to r.
P minus r of f over Sigma P Where r p is the expected porfolio return.
R f is the risk free return which we'll discuss in just the second and then Sigma P is portfolio standard
deviation.
So our P and Sigma we kind of already understand just the expected portfolio return and Sigma that is
the volatility or standard deviation.
But what is risk free return a risk free return is the return you would receive if you had put your
money instead of putting in a portfolio into an investment such as a bank savings account.
And sometimes people also use Liab or Treasury bond return rates as risk free returns and all three
of these things are essentially risk free something to keep in mind is that currently in the United
States and I'm filming this in early 2017 the actual returns for a risk free investment such as putting
your money into a bank account are in reality very close to zero.
So it's just easier to approximate this risk free return for our calculations as being zero.
Keep in mind though the Federal Reserve may continue to raise interest rates in the future affecting
this result.
I know there are some online banks that have a return of 1 percent on a savings account.
So you could also use that as your approximation for a risk free return in this class.
And you'll notice that in a lot of other online studies people are just using zero because that's what
it's been for such a long time.
So for now assuming that rate of risk return is zero we get that the Sharpe ratio is just equal to the
mean return divided by the standard deviation.
Keep in mind the Sharpe ratio was actually originally thought of as a yearly metric.
That is a mean yearly return versus a mean daily return.
So and William Sharp was actually formulating this.
He thought people were going to write an mean yearly return divided by the standard deviation over the
year.
However we're usually dealing with daily data or maybe even weekly data and it's actually really easy
for us to fix this ratio to become a yearly return ratio.
So we're going to call this the annualized Sharpe ratio.
And it can be attained by multiplying a K factor against your sampling rate.
So if your data has a daily sampling rate then what you have do is set K equal to the square root of
252.
We have 252 business days in a year.
If you have weekly data you'll multiply your sampling Sharpe ratio by the square of 52 and if you have
monthly data you'll just multiply it by the square of 12.
So what does that actually mean.
Well if we go back and you're using this formula of mean return divided by standard deviation and you
happen to calculate mean return instead of deviation on daily data to get the annualize sharp ratio
you would just take your case.
In this case daily square of 2:52 and multiply it by the sharp ratio and that gives you the annualized
Sharper's issue.
Now if you're the one with yearly data and you actually just have straight up the yearly standard deviation
and the yearly mean or return then you don't have to do any sort of K factor multiplication.
All right let's see how to actually do all of this with python in the next lecture.
We'll open up a Jupiter notebook and code all this out.
Thanks everyone and I'll see you there.